README.md, before:

# 📚 StudyPal AI

**StudyPal AI** is an advanced productivity web application designed to help students st## 🔒 Security Features

- **🚫 Zero Client-Side API Keys**: No secrets exposed in frontend JavaScript code
- **🌐 Origin-Based Authentication**: Backend validates requests from trusted localhost origins  
- **⏱️ Rate Limiting**: Prevents API abuse and protects costs
  - Chat endpoint: 2 requests per minute
  - Save session: 2 requests per minute  
  - Get sessions: 2 requests per minute
- **🔒 CORS Protection**: Prevents unauthorized cross-origin requests  
- **✅ Input Validation**: Robust error handling and data validation
- **🔐 Environment Variables**: Secure credential management in gitignored `.env` files
- **🛡️ GitGuardian Verified**: Repository scanned with 0 secrets detected

See [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) for detailed security implementation.cused, motivated, and engaged during study sessions. It combines powerful study tools with gamification elements and AI-powered assistance to create the ultimate learning companion.

## 🚀 **Live Demo**
**Try it now:** [https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/](https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/)

*Note: The live demo includes all features except AI chat (which requires backend setup for API keys). All study tools and games work perfectly!*

---

## ✨ Features

### 🎯 Core Study Tools
- **⏱️ Dynamic Study Timer**: Interactive timer with visual progress ring and 20-minute cycles
- **📊 Real-time Statistics**: Track total study time and session counts
- **💬 AI Chat Assistant**: Integrated AI-powered chat for motivation, study tips, and productivity advice
- **📈 Study History**: Complete session tracking with visual charts and detailed analytics
- **🔄 Session Management**: Save, pause, resume, and finish study sessions with data persistence

### 🎮 Gamification & Rewards
- **🏆 Progressive Game Unlocks**: Earn mini-games by reaching study milestones
  - **✅ Palindrome Challenge** (Unlocks at 20 minutes)
  - **🧠 Brain Flash Quiz** (Unlocks at 40 minutes) 
  - **😊 Emoji Memory Puzzle** (Unlocks at 40 minutes)
- **📊 High Score Tracking**: Local storage of personal bests for each game
- **🎉 Achievement Celebrations**: Visual feedback for unlocking new content

### 🎨 User Experience
- **🌟 Animated Background**: Floating particle effects with neon cyber theme
- **📱 Fully Responsive Design**: Optimized for desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **🎵 Visual Feedback**: Smooth animations, transitions, and progress indicators
- **🌙 Dark Theme**: Eye-friendly design for extended study sessions
- **⚡ Fast Performance**: Vanilla JavaScript for optimal speed and reliability


---

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### Option 1: Frontend Only (No Setup Required) ⭐ **RECOMMENDED FOR TRYING OUT**
**Perfect for experiencing the full app immediately:**
1. **Live Demo**: Visit [https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/](https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/)
2. **Or Local**: Clone and open `frontend/docs/index.html` in your browser
3. ✅ **Study timer, games, and analytics work perfectly**
4. ✅ **No setup required - works offline**
5. ❌ AI chat requires backend setup (shows connection status)

### Option 2: Full Setup with AI Chat 🤖

#### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+ and OpenRouter API key (https://openrouter.ai/)

#### Automated Setup (Recommended)
```bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai.git
cd studypal-ai

# 2. Run the secure setup script
python setup.py
# Follow prompts to enter your OpenRouter API key

# 3. Install backend dependencies
cd backend
python -m venv ../backend-env
source ../backend-env/bin/activate  # Windows: ../backend-env/Scripts/activate  
pip install flask flask-cors openai python-dotenv requests

# 4. Start the secure backend
python app.py  # Backend runs on http://127.0.0.1:5001

# 5. Open frontend/docs/index.html in your browser
```

#### Manual Setup Steps
1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai.git
   cd studypal-ai
   ```

2. **Backend setup:**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -m venv ../backend-env
   source ../backend-env/bin/activate  # Windows: ../backend-env/Scripts/activate
   pip install flask flask-cors openai python-dotenv requests
   ```

3. **Create `backend/.env` with your API keys:**
   ```env
   OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1-your-api-key-here
   API_SECRET_KEY=your-random-secret-here
   ```

4. **Run the application:**
   ```bash
   # Terminal 1: Backend
   cd backend && python app.py
   
   # Terminal 2: Frontend  
   cd frontend/docs && open index.html
   ```


#### 🔒 **Security Features**
- **No API keys in frontend code** - All keys secured in backend environment
- **Origin-based authentication** - Backend validates local requests automatically
- **Rate limiting** - 2 requests per minute protection
- **GitGuardian verified** - Zero secrets exposed in repository

---

## 🏗️ Project Structure

```
studypal-ai/
├── 📁 frontend/
│   └── 📁 docs/
│       ├── 📄 index.html          # Main application interface
│       ├── 🎨 style.css           # Complete styling & responsive design
│       └── ⚡ script.js           # Frontend game logic & UI interactions
├── 📁 backend/
│   ├── 🐍 app.py                  # Flask API server with security
│   └── 🗃️ studypal_data.db       # SQLite database for session storage
├── 📁 backend-env/                # Python virtual environment
├── 🔧 setup.py                    # Automated setup script
├── 🔒 SECURITY.md                 # Security implementation details
├── 🚫 .gitignore                  # Git ignore rules
└── 📖 README.md                   # This file
```

---

## 💻 Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **HTML5** - Semantic structure and accessibility
- **CSS3** - Advanced styling, animations, and responsive design
- **JavaScript (ES6+)** - Interactive functionality and game logic
- **Chart.js** - Data visualization for study analytics
- **Font Awesome** - Professional iconography

### Backend
- **Python 3** - Server-side logic
- **Flask** - Lightweight web framework  
- **SQLite** - Local database for session persistence
- **OpenRouter API** - AI-powered chat assistance
- **Flask-CORS** - Cross-origin resource sharing
- **Rate Limiting** - API abuse prevention
- **Authentication** - API key security

### Development Tools
- **Git** - Version control
- **VS Code** - Development environment
- **Live Server** - Local development server

---

## 🎮 Game Details

### Palindrome Challenge
- **Objective**: Check if words or sentences are palindromes
- **Features**: Real-time validation, case-insensitive checking
- **Unlock**: 20 minutes of study time

### Brain Flash Quiz
- **Objective**: Answer math and logic questions quickly
- **Features**: 60-second timer, multiple choice questions, high score tracking
- **Questions**: 20+ varied questions covering math and logic
- **Unlock**: 40 minutes of study time

### Emoji Memory Puzzle
- **Objective**: Remember and repeat emoji sequences
- **Features**: Progressive difficulty, visual sequence display, round tracking
- **Gameplay**: Watch the sequence, then repeat it correctly
- **Unlock**: 40 minutes of study time

---

## � Features in Detail

### Study Timer
- Visual progress ring with gradient colors
- Automatic 20-minute cycle tracking
- Pause/resume functionality
- Session completion with data saving

### AI Chat Assistant
- Natural language processing for study-related queries
- Motivational messages and productivity tips
- Real-time typing indicators
- Connection status monitoring

### Analytics Dashboard
- Session history with timestamps
- Visual charts showing study progress
- Time tracking with minute precision
- Exportable data for further analysis

### Responsive Design
- Mobile-first approach
- Tablet-specific optimizations (769px-812px breakpoint)
- Desktop layouts for larger screens
- Touch-friendly interface elements

---

## � Configuration

### Environment Variables
```env
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
FLASK_DEBUG=True  # For development
```

### Database Schema
```sql
CREATE TABLE study_sessions (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    total_time INTEGER NOT NULL,
    session_count INTEGER NOT NULL,
    timestamp DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Here's how you can help:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`
3. **Commit changes**: `git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`
4. **Push to branch**: `git push origin feature/amazing-feature`
5. **Open a Pull Request**

### Development Guidelines
- Follow existing code style and conventions
- Test all features across different devices
- Update documentation for new features
- Ensure responsive design principles

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Japjot Singh**
- GitHub: [@japjotsingh18](https://github.com/japjotsingh18)
- Project: [StudyPal AI](https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai)

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- OpenAI for providing the AI chat capabilities
- Chart.js for beautiful data visualizations
- Font Awesome for the icon library
- The open-source community for inspiration and tools

---

⭐ **If you find StudyPal AI helpful, please give it a star!** ⭐

Commit message:

📝 Enhance live demo description - Include study history feature
✅ Updated demo note to mention study history tracking
✅ Detailed what works perfectly without backend setup
✅ Clear distinction between frontend and backend features
✅ Better showcasing of localStorage-based functionality

README.md, after:

# 📚 StudyPal AI

**StudyPal AI** is an advanced productivity web application designed to help students stay focused, motivated, and engaged during study sessions. It combines powerful study tools with gamification elements and AI-powered assistance to create the ultimate learning companion.

## 🚀 **Live Demo**
**Try it now:** [https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/](https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/)

*Note: The live demo includes all features except AI chat (which requires backend setup for API keys). Study timer, games, analytics dashboard, and study history tracking all work perfectly with local storage!*

---

## 🔒 Security Features

- **🚫 Zero Client-Side API Keys**: No secrets exposed in frontend JavaScript code
- **🌐 Origin-Based Authentication**: Backend validates requests from trusted localhost origins  
- **⏱️ Rate Limiting**: Prevents API abuse and protects costs
  - Chat endpoint: 2 requests per minute
  - Save session: 2 requests per minute  
  - Get sessions: 2 requests per minute
- **🔒 CORS Protection**: Prevents unauthorized cross-origin requests  
- **✅ Input Validation**: Robust error handling and data validation
- **🔐 Environment Variables**: Secure credential management in gitignored `.env` files
- **🛡️ GitGuardian Verified**: Repository scanned with 0 secrets detected

See [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) for detailed security implementation.

---

## ✨ Features

### 🎯 Core Study Tools
- **⏱️ Dynamic Study Timer**: Interactive timer with visual progress ring and 20-minute cycles
- **📊 Real-time Statistics**: Track total study time and session counts
- **💬 AI Chat Assistant**: Integrated AI-powered chat for motivation, study tips, and productivity advice
- **📈 Study History**: Complete session tracking with visual charts and detailed analytics
- **🔄 Session Management**: Save, pause, resume, and finish study sessions with data persistence

### 🎮 Gamification & Rewards
- **🏆 Progressive Game Unlocks**: Earn mini-games by reaching study milestones
  - **✅ Palindrome Challenge** (Unlocks at 20 minutes)
  - **🧠 Brain Flash Quiz** (Unlocks at 40 minutes) 
  - **😊 Emoji Memory Puzzle** (Unlocks at 40 minutes)
- **📊 High Score Tracking**: Local storage of personal bests for each game
- **🎉 Achievement Celebrations**: Visual feedback for unlocking new content

### 🎨 User Experience
- **🌟 Animated Background**: Floating particle effects with neon cyber theme
- **📱 Fully Responsive Design**: Optimized for desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **🎵 Visual Feedback**: Smooth animations, transitions, and progress indicators
- **🌙 Dark Theme**: Eye-friendly design for extended study sessions
- **⚡ Fast Performance**: Vanilla JavaScript for optimal speed and reliability


---

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### Option 1: Frontend Only (No Setup Required) ⭐ **RECOMMENDED FOR TRYING OUT**
**Perfect for experiencing the full app immediately:**
1. **Live Demo**: Visit [https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/](https://japjotsingh18.github.io/studypal-ai/frontend/docs/)
2. **Or Local**: Clone and open `frontend/docs/index.html` in your browser

**✅ What works perfectly without backend:**
- ✅ **Study timer with visual progress** - Full timer functionality with 20-minute cycles
- ✅ **All three mini-games** - Palindrome Challenge, Brain Flash Quiz, Emoji Memory Puzzle
- ✅ **Study history & analytics** - Complete session tracking with charts (localStorage)
- ✅ **Game unlock progression** - Milestone-based rewards system
- ✅ **Real-time statistics** - Track total study time and session counts
- ✅ **Responsive design** - Works on all devices

**❌ Requires backend setup:**
- ❌ **AI chat assistant** - Shows connection status and offline responses

### Option 2: Full Setup with AI Chat 🤖

#### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+ and OpenRouter API key (https://openrouter.ai/)

#### Automated Setup (Recommended)
```bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai.git
cd studypal-ai

# 2. Run the secure setup script
python setup.py
# Follow prompts to enter your OpenRouter API key

# 3. Install backend dependencies
cd backend
python -m venv ../backend-env
source ../backend-env/bin/activate  # Windows: ../backend-env/Scripts/activate  
pip install flask flask-cors openai python-dotenv requests

# 4. Start the secure backend
python app.py  # Backend runs on http://127.0.0.1:5001

# 5. Open frontend/docs/index.html in your browser
```

#### Manual Setup Steps
1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai.git
   cd studypal-ai
   ```

2. **Backend setup:**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -m venv ../backend-env
   source ../backend-env/bin/activate  # Windows: ../backend-env/Scripts/activate
   pip install flask flask-cors openai python-dotenv requests
   ```

3. **Create `backend/.env` with your API keys:**
   ```env
   OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1-your-api-key-here
   API_SECRET_KEY=your-random-secret-here
   ```

4. **Run the application:**
   ```bash
   # Terminal 1: Backend
   cd backend && python app.py
   
   # Terminal 2: Frontend  
   cd frontend/docs && open index.html
   ```


#### 🔒 **Security Features**
- **No API keys in frontend code** - All keys secured in backend environment
- **Origin-based authentication** - Backend validates local requests automatically
- **Rate limiting** - 2 requests per minute protection
- **GitGuardian verified** - Zero secrets exposed in repository

---

## 🏗️ Project Structure

```
studypal-ai/
├── 📁 frontend/
│   └── 📁 docs/
│       ├── 📄 index.html          # Main application interface
│       ├── 🎨 style.css           # Complete styling & responsive design
│       └── ⚡ script.js           # Frontend game logic & UI interactions
├── 📁 backend/
│   ├── 🐍 app.py                  # Flask API server with security
│   └── 🗃️ studypal_data.db       # SQLite database for session storage
├── 📁 backend-env/                # Python virtual environment
├── 🔧 setup.py                    # Automated setup script
├── 🔒 SECURITY.md                 # Security implementation details
├── 🚫 .gitignore                  # Git ignore rules
└── 📖 README.md                   # This file
```

---

## 💻 Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **HTML5** - Semantic structure and accessibility
- **CSS3** - Advanced styling, animations, and responsive design
- **JavaScript (ES6+)** - Interactive functionality and game logic
- **Chart.js** - Data visualization for study analytics
- **Font Awesome** - Professional iconography

### Backend
- **Python 3** - Server-side logic
- **Flask** - Lightweight web framework  
- **SQLite** - Local database for session persistence
- **OpenRouter API** - AI-powered chat assistance
- **Flask-CORS** - Cross-origin resource sharing
- **Rate Limiting** - API abuse prevention
- **Authentication** - API key security

### Development Tools
- **Git** - Version control
- **VS Code** - Development environment
- **Live Server** - Local development server

---

## 🎮 Game Details

### Palindrome Challenge
- **Objective**: Check if words or sentences are palindromes
- **Features**: Real-time validation, case-insensitive checking
- **Unlock**: 20 minutes of study time

### Brain Flash Quiz
- **Objective**: Answer math and logic questions quickly
- **Features**: 60-second timer, multiple choice questions, high score tracking
- **Questions**: 20+ varied questions covering math and logic
- **Unlock**: 40 minutes of study time

### Emoji Memory Puzzle
- **Objective**: Remember and repeat emoji sequences
- **Features**: Progressive difficulty, visual sequence display, round tracking
- **Gameplay**: Watch the sequence, then repeat it correctly
- **Unlock**: 40 minutes of study time

---

## � Features in Detail

### Study Timer
- Visual progress ring with gradient colors
- Automatic 20-minute cycle tracking
- Pause/resume functionality
- Session completion with data saving

### AI Chat Assistant
- Natural language processing for study-related queries
- Motivational messages and productivity tips
- Real-time typing indicators
- Connection status monitoring

### Analytics Dashboard
- Session history with timestamps
- Visual charts showing study progress
- Time tracking with minute precision
- Exportable data for further analysis

### Responsive Design
- Mobile-first approach
- Tablet-specific optimizations (769px-812px breakpoint)
- Desktop layouts for larger screens
- Touch-friendly interface elements

---

## � Configuration

### Environment Variables
```env
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
FLASK_DEBUG=True  # For development
```

### Database Schema
```sql
CREATE TABLE study_sessions (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    total_time INTEGER NOT NULL,
    session_count INTEGER NOT NULL,
    timestamp DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Here's how you can help:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`
3. **Commit changes**: `git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`
4. **Push to branch**: `git push origin feature/amazing-feature`
5. **Open a Pull Request**

### Development Guidelines
- Follow existing code style and conventions
- Test all features across different devices
- Update documentation for new features
- Ensure responsive design principles

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Japjot Singh**
- GitHub: [@japjotsingh18](https://github.com/japjotsingh18)
- Project: [StudyPal AI](https://github.com/japjotsingh18/studypal-ai)
- The open-source community for inspiration and tools
---
---
## 🙏 Acknowledgments
⭐ **If you find StudyPal AI helpful, please give it a star!** ⭐
- OpenAI for providing the AI chat capabilities
- Chart.js for beautiful data visualizations
- Font Awesome for the icon library
- The open-source community for inspiration and tools

---

⭐ **If you find StudyPal AI helpful, please give it a star!** ⭐
